To speak.
Do you remember how to say to speak?
It begins with a silent H.
Ablar.
Ablar good.
And what is I speak or I'm speaking?
Ablo.
Good.
And what was to sleep or to be dormant, let's say?
Dormir.
And how do you say I sleep
Good.
We said also that you can get the additional meaning of uh I fall asleep by saying I sleep myself.
Meduermo.
Good.
To eat was comer.
Comer.
Good.
So I eat or I'm eating is
Como.
So here the O doesn't split.
Good.
To have breakfast.
To have breakfast, we don't say in Spanish to have.
Breakfast, we have a verb to breakfast, let's say.
And the verb to breakfast is desayunar.
Desayunar.
Breakfast and desayunar are direct translations of each other, in fact.
I don't know if you noticed that in English breakfast is break fast.
When we have breakfast we break the fast
And in Spanish des is like an ayunar is to fast.
So to an fast
So desayunar is like to unfast, to break fast, desayunar.
Desayunar.
To have breakfast.
I am having breakfast or I have breakfast.
Desayuno.
And desayuno is also the noun.
El desayuno is the breakfast.
What was to wait or to hope?
Desperate is related because again we have this des like in desayunar which is like unhoped or unhopeful is to be desperate.
So to wait or to hope
Esperar.
Good.
What is I wait or I'm waiting or I hope and or I'm hoping?
Espero.
So we've been giving the verbs two translations in the present tense.
I speak or I'm speaking.
I go or I'm going.
I wait or I'm waiting.
This is because this ing tense in English we really overuse it.
For example, we use this ing in English to refer to the future.
He's doing it tomorrow, whereas in Spanish we just use the present tense with that future context, lo hace, mañana.
Which is why we need to give both translations for ASI, for example, he makes or does or he's making or doing.
And we translate Abloh as I speak and I'm speaking.
But this doesn't mean that I'm speaking doesn't exist.
It does exist, but we use it in Spanish only when we want to show what we are doing right now in this moment.
So, beginning this structure, I am speaking, this I am, do you think you would choose ser for characteristics, or do you think you would choose estar for states?
Well it's it's a state.
So a story.
Good.
We will use a star because of course what we are doing is a state.
So we'll always use a star with these structures.
So the first part of this sentence is a stoy.
Now to get speaking, ing from to speak, we take off r and we add ano, ando, and we get hablando.
Hablando.
So I'm speaking.
Estoy hablando.
Good.
So maybe somebody interrupts you and you won't say hablo.
You will say estoy hablando.
How would you say I am waiting?
And you mean right now?
Right now, I'm waiting here.
I'm waiting here
Estoy esperando aquí.
Good.
So you could say espero aquí.
Maybe it would sound a little more like I'll wait here rather than I am waiting here.
But both are fine.
In many situations both are fine and there will be just a slight change in meaning.
Espero aquí, estoy esperando aquí.
What you can't do is say a meeting with her tomorrow.
The ING you need to use it just for what you're doing right now.
So how was to speak?
And how would you say I speak or I'm speaking?
Ablo.
And what was to prepare?
If you forgot it you can go from preparation.
Preparation.
Preparar.
And I prepare or I'm preparing.
Preparo.
Good.
So how would you say I'm preparing it tomorrow?
Lo preparo mañana.
So if we want to show, if we want to emphasize that we're doing something right now, I am preparing.
Firstly, if we divide that up into two bits, I am preparing.
Estoy.
Estoy, good.
Preparar becomes
Preparando.
Good.
So how would you say I am preparing?
Estoy preparando.
Good.
So that's if you want to say I'm preparing it right now, you can use this structure.
So how would you say I am preparing it?
Lo estoy preparando.
Lo estoy preparando o estoy preparando lo.
Even though it's a changed verb here, we can have the lo after ando.
Stoy preparando lo o lo estoy preparando.
We said that to have breakfast was desayunar.
So how would you say we are having breakfast and you mean right now?
Estamos desayunando.
Ando.
Good.
Estamos desayunando.
So for our verbs, we take off the R.
And we put ando and we get this tense to show what we're doing right now.
And we're not going to use it as we do in English.
I'm finding out tomorrow.
Um I'm doing it next week.
I'm preparing it later.
How would you say I'm preparing it later?
Stoy preparando
This is not how we use it.
So in Spanish we only use it to describe what we're doing right now.
So this is why we're giving breparo, for example, the translation of both
I prepare and I'm preparing so that when we want to say things like I'm preparing it later, we don't go to estoy preparando.
Lo preparo más tarde.
Good.
But if you wanted to give the meaning of I'm preparing it right now, how would you say it?
Estoy preparando lo.
Good.
Estoy preparando lo o lo estoy preparando.
And then you get the meaning of right now in this moment.
Good, so for our verbs, we're taking off the R and we're putting and to get this ing for R ear verbs
We take off the air or the ear and we put on yendo, yendo, i-e-n-d-o to get this ing form.
So how would you get eating from to eat?
How would eating be from comer?
Comiento.
Good.
So how would you say I'm eating and you mean right now?
Comien estoy comiendo.
Estoy comiendo.
Good.
I am eating.
And how would you say he is eating or she is eating?
Or you fuman?
Good.
Can I speak to Pablo?
And you say.
You mean right now.
What was uh to sell?
You can think of vending machine.
Vender.
Good.
How would you say they sell it?
They sell it
Venden.
So it's Lovenden.
Lovenden.
Good.
How would you say they're selling it tomorrow or they will sell it tomorrow?
Lo venden maniana.
Lo vende manana.
Good.
Now if you want to say they're selling it right now and you want to give that meaning right now, how would it be?
Están vendiendo lo good.
Están vendiando.
Or lo están vendiendo.
Good.